Add a tutorial on how to join the DAL as a baker on Weeklynet (#263)
trilitech/tezos-developer-docs: docs/tutorials/running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps.md

# Running the DAL as a Weeklynet baker, in 5 steps

> Tezos' Data-Availability Layer (DAL for short), which we presented [in a previous article](https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/data-availability-layer-tezos.html), is a key component of our scalability roadmap for Tezos. In a nutshell, the DAL is about increasing the bandwidth available for Tezos smart rollups thanks to a new parallel P2P network on which rollup could connect to fetch inputs but without compromising their security and in particular the possibility for any participant to detect fraud attempts from rollup operators and refute them in the Tezos protocol.

Reviewer: `on which rollup could connect` -> `on which rollups could connect`

Reviewer: and I find the end of the paragraph a little bit technical already.

Author: Typo fixed in d5f17df.

For the technicality of the end of the paragraph, what about moving it to a footnote?

Author: Removed the technical part in 95c3fae.

> Tezos' Data-Availability Layer (DAL for short), which we presented [in a previous article](https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/data-availability-layer-tezos.html), is a key component of our scalability roadmap for Tezos. In a nutshell, the DAL is about increasing the bandwidth available for Tezos smart rollups thanks to a new parallel P2P network on which rollup could connect to fetch inputs but without compromising their security and in particular the possibility for any participant to detect fraud attempts from rollup operators and refute them in the Tezos protocol.

Reviewer 2: `smart rollups` -> `Smart Rollups`

Author: Fixed in 6ecfc5c.

> Tezos' Data-Availability Layer (DAL for short), which we presented [in a previous article](https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/data-availability-layer-tezos.html), is a key component of our scalability roadmap for Tezos. In a nutshell, the DAL is about increasing the bandwidth available for Tezos smart rollups thanks to a new parallel P2P network on which rollup could connect to fetch inputs but without compromising their security and in particular the possibility for any participant to detect fraud attempts from rollup operators and refute them in the Tezos protocol.

Reviewer 3: Taking the second option, here is a concrete suggestion:
```suggestion
Tezos' [Data-Availability Layer](https://tezos.gitlab.io/shell/dal.html) (DAL for short), is a key component for the scalability of Tezos. In a nutshell, the DAL is about increasing the data bandwidth available for Tezos smart rollups thanks to a new parallel P2P network on which rollup could connect to fetch inputs but without compromising their security and in particular the possibility for any participant to detect fraud attempts from rollup operators and refute them in the Tezos protocol.
```

> In order for the DAL to be as secured as the Tezos Layer 1 itself, bakers would play a very important role in it. Currently, bakers on the L1 network are not only responsible for producing blocks but also for attesting that blocks are published on the L1 network; they are rewarded for this through protocol incentives and they also monitor the behaviour of other bakers to denounce cheating attempts. Similarly, the role of bakers for the DAL would be to attest the publication of data on the DAL P2P network, they would be rewarded for this through protocol incentives, and denounce cheating attempts from other bakers.

Author: Suggestion taken in da9c9a9. I agree this is too intricate.

> In order for the DAL to be as secured as the Tezos Layer 1 itself, bakers would play a very important role in it. Currently, bakers on the L1 network are not only responsible for producing blocks but also for attesting that blocks are published on the L1 network; they are rewarded for this through protocol incentives and they also monitor the behaviour of other bakers to denounce cheating attempts. Similarly, the role of bakers for the DAL would be to attest the publication of data on the DAL P2P network, they would be rewarded for this through protocol incentives, and denounce cheating attempts from other bakers.

Author: I've also removed the part about denounciation in a3545bf.

> Since a new P2P network with hundreds of participants may take some time to setup, we will propose a smooth transition toward the DAL by not including any protocol incentives for DAL attestations in the first mainnet version of the DAL, this will let plenty of time for bakers to join the DAL network without risking any reward loss. This incentive-free version of the DAL is already available on the weeklynet test network and we consider it to be stable enough to be put in the hands of bakers willing to test it and report any issue they may find. Feedback from bakers is very important for us now because modifying DAL may become much harder once it is part of a protocol amendment proposal.

Author: Done in 7ff5b82.

> This article is a tutorial for bakers willing to test the DAL on the weeklynet network so that they can play with the feature and prepare well in advance for a possible future activation of the DAL on mainnet.

Author: Done in 7ff5b82.

> /!\ Warning: This tutorial uses a very simple setup running all required daemons on the same machine. In a production environment, we advise against running a DAL attester node under the same IP address than a baker's node because the DAL node may leak the IP address and ease DOS attacks on the baker. See also [the DAL documentation page on baking](https://tezos.gitlab.io/shell/dal_bakers.html).

Author: AFAIU, the risk is that by looking at the topics to which the DAL nodes are subscribed, it's easy to identify the DAL nodes of bakers and also to associate the IP of these DAL nodes to the pkh of the corresponding bakers.

> /!\ Warning: This article was written in January 2024 to help bakers experiment with the DAL. If you are reading this article in the future, the UX of the DAL components will probably have changed with the feedback we got, in particular from the testers following this tutorial.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
/!\ Warning: The UX of the DAL components will be subject to changes with the feedback from the testers following this tutorial, so this tutorial will be updated accordingly. Feel free to file issues if it's not up-to-date.
```

- [Step 1: get a Weeklynet-compatible Octez](./running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps/get-octez)
- [Step 2: run an Octez node on Weeklynet](./running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps/run-node)
- [Step 3: prepare an account for baking on Weeklynet](./running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps/prepare-account)
- [Step 4: run an Octez DAL node on Weeklynet](./running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps/run-dal-node)

> - [Step 5: run an Octez baking deamon on Weeklynet](./running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps/run-baker)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Step 5: run an Octez baking daemon on Weeklynet](./running-the-dal-as-a-weeklynet-baker-in-5-steps/run-baker)
```
